Wider Context

  *

    Corinth was a very mulicultural an d vibrant port

      o with all that implies
      o bye-word for a dodgy place

    Letter part of an exchange

      o

        at least Pauls second reply

        providing answers to questions they raised and problems he
        percieved in teh churches

        this one covers prblems of church factions, sexual behaviour,
        the role of women, how to behave at teh eucharist and as we see
        in the reading food offered to idols,

        we only have one side of the exchange

    Things were in one sense easy and clear for the Jews

      o They had an agreement
      o He had rescued them out of Egypt, int gteh promissed land,
        because he loved them
      o in return they worhiped only him and they kept his laws
      o Rescued
      o obedient to law

    For Paul and the Christians

      o God had rescued them again, thorugh Christ's sacrifice
      o How must they respond?
          + n by keeping laws
          + that had been the old arrangement - ot was scrapped
          + must live act andspeak like those who belong to God
          + "Obedience of faith"
          + th enew agreement
              # rescued
              # obedient to VChrist

    Under the old agreement, and in what had become a relatively simle
    and stable social setup, there was a law for everything. 613 laws in
    the 5 books and then piles of case law accumulated over th eyears.

    Now there was, in effect just two

      o

        And he said to him, “You shall love the Lord your God with all
        your heart and with all your soul and with all your mind. 38
        This is the great and first commandment. 39 And a second is like
        it: You shall love your neighbor as yourself. 4

    New questions arose, particularly in multicultural Corinth.

      o many temples, regular sacrifices. Should they eat it.
      o some knew that the "gods" had no real existence - so what did it
        matter?
      o some though it shoudl not be eaten
      o What did the law say? They did nto have a law for this.

    We only have one side of the exchange remember - and you may not
    have a written version of the reading to look atto look at

      o

        "Everything is lawful" is in quotes.

        Paul is echoing back to them what they had put in their letter
        in his answer

        He responds - yes  but doign it does not always help

        yes but it does nto always build up

        << quote with voices >>

        there may be no specific law to help here in this novel
        situation but we must fall back on the second of our two

        love the others, support and build up their faith

          + if they do not mind (as Christians or as non-Christians)
              # then you need not
          + if they mind - presumably as new or less confident Christians
              # you shopudl mind
              # to help, love and support them
              # don't eat
              # do his for God's glory
              # this is not for your benefit or to avoid looking bad
                  * it's for the others
                  * its for the many
                  * t's for God's Kingdom
          +  

